From cairns@CS.Stanford.EDU Tue Nov  1 17:24:08 1994
Status: RO
X-VM-v5-Data: ([nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil]
	["7383" "Tue" "1" "November" "94" "14:24:03" "PST" "Heather Cairns" "cairns@CS.Stanford.EDU" nil "143" "Stanford Computer Science" "^From:" nil nil "11"])
Received: from Sunburn.Stanford.EDU (Sunburn.Stanford.EDU [36.8.0.178]) by cs.oberlin.edu (8.6.4/8.6.4) with SMTP id RAA12022 for <jmankoff@cs.oberlin.edu>; Tue, 1 Nov 1994 17:24:06 -0500
Received:  by Sunburn.Stanford.EDU (5.67b/25-SUNBURN-eef) id AA20319; Tue, 1 Nov 1994 14:24:04 -0800
Message-Id: <CMM.0.90.4.783728643.cairns@Sunburn.Stanford.EDU>
From: Heather Cairns <cairns@CS.Stanford.EDU>
To: jmankoff
Subject: Stanford Computer Science
Date: Tue, 1 Nov 94 14:24:03 PST



	        Thank you for your inquiry for information on the
                COMPUTER SCIENCE DEPARTMENT AT STANFORD UNIVERSITY.

Your inquiry has been forwarded to the main office of Graduate Admissions.  An
application packet will be sent to you in three to four weeks.  If, after this
time, you do not receive a packet, please contact Graduate Admissions at (415)
723-4291 or send correspondence to:
			
			Graduate Admissions Support Section
			Office of the Registrar
			Stanford University
			Stanford, CA  94305

This application packet will include the Guide to Graduate Admissions
application, a reprint from the Stanford University Bulletin course catalogue
and a brief handout from the Computer Science Department.

A $7.00 postage fee (check or money order payable to Stanford University) is
required for all INTERNATIONAL requests.  The request for $7.00 will be mailed
before the packet.  Additional questions which are not addressed in the
information you receive may be directed via e-mail or phone.  Send requests and
questions to:  admissions@cs.Stanford.EDU or call (415) 723-6602.

Heather Cairns
Graduate Admissions Assistant
Computer Science

                IMPORTANT NOTES TO PROSPECTIVE APPLICANTS
                                 1994-95

This information is designed to facilitate your application processing and to
maximize your chance for admission.  PLEASE READ CAREFULLY.  Additional
information pertinent to the Computer Science Department is printed below.  If
you have questions or concerns, please reach us at (415) 723-6602 or you may
send e-mail to admissions@cs.Stanford.EDU.

Most questions you may have regrding application procedures and the Computer
Science Department are answered in the reprint of the STANFORD UNIVERSITY
BULLETIN, COURSES AND DEGREES, and in the Guide to Graduate Admissions
application booklet.  Both publications are included in the application packet
from the main office of Graduate Admissions. Your request for information has
been forwarded to their office.  If you do not receive your packet three
weeks from this notice, contact Graduate Admissions at (415) 723-4291.

Detailed descriptions for the Master of Science and Doctor of Philosophy
programs are in the reprint of the STANFORD UNIVERSITY BULLETIN.  Please note
that our M.S. degree does not lead to the Ph.D. degree.  Applicants planning to
pursue a Ph.D. degree should apply directly to that program.  DO NOT check
MS/PhD on the application since the CS Department does not offer such a
program.  

The January 1 deadline for the following Autumn Quarter is final for all
programs.  Because of the large volume of applications received during the last
week of December, we urge you to submit your application early to avoid any
possible delay in its processing.  All application materials must be received
before January 1st for your application to be considered in the review process.
Your application cannot be evaluated until all supporting materials are received.

Exceptions to the deadline are made only for Honor Co-op applicants and current
Stanford students.  Honor's Co-op applicants may apply only once per academic
year.  Information on these deadlines is available from the Department.

All application materials should be sent directly to the Computer Science
Department.  Based on past experience, we strongly advise that you submit your
references and transcripts simultaneously with your application.  Some schools
and some references will only send information directly to Stanford.  In these
cases, we will accept material send under separate cover.  To avoid missing the
above deadline, make sure any material sent under separate cover by others has
been sent in a timely fashion.

Admissions for the Computer Science Department are very competetive. Each year
over 800 applications are received for our graduate programs.  It is
recommended that all parts of the application be strong as many excellent
applications are received.  In order to ensure a complete and competitive
application, careful preparation and attention is required.  Please plan well
in advance for the January 1 deadline.

The following application materials must be received before January 1, 1995:

    * Completed Stanford University application form (from Guide to Graduate
       Admissions book).
    * The yellow departmental Supplementary Information Form (mailed by the
      office of Graduate Admissions).
    * Three letters of recommendation.  We recommend that at least 2 of these
      letters be from academic sources.
    * Statement of Purpose-short, concise, focussed and well written.
    * Transcripts from EACH school attended (including transcripts from any NCO
      classes taken at Stanford).
    * GRE Scores-ALL applicants are required to take the General Test.
          Ph.D applicants are also required to take the Computer Science
          Subject Test.
          Scores from a subject test in Engineering or Mathematics are
          accepted if it reflects your background more closely.
    * TOEFL is required if you have not attended a U.S. college for at least
      two years. TOEFL must be taken within the last nine months.
    * International Student's Financial Statement - required by Stanford
      University.

IMPORTANT  Official GRE scores must be received by us directly from the
Educational Testing Services BEFORE you can be considered for admission.  You
may include a photocopy of your scores in case the official scores arrive late.
We urge you to take the GRE exam early enough to have your scores available
when you submit your application.  Tests taken after OCTOBER 1994 will not be
received in time to be considered for Fall admission.

It will not be possible to answer all telephone inquiries regarding the status
of any application.  If you wish to be assured that your application was
received, complete and return the postcards included in your application
packet.

Every effort will be made to inform applicants of the admissions decision by
the middle of March or the beginning of April for the M.S. program.  Honors
Co-op will have a decision soon after the deadline.

All incoming PhD. students are suported by teaching and/or research
assistantships but are strongly encouraged to apply for outside fellowships as
well.  WE DO NOT OFFER SUPPORT FOR M.S. STUDENTS, however, a few teaching and
research assistantships are available.  Students are discouraged from relying
on assistantships to pay for tuition as these positions are limited and not
guaranteed.  Teaching and research assistantships can only be arranged once you
are a registered student.

The only form of financial aid is in the form of student loans, and in order to
qualify, you must be a U.S. citizen or permanent resident.  Information about
student loans is automatically sent from the Financial Aid Office once you are
admitted.

Because of the volume of requests for interviews with faculty members, the
department has to deny all such requests.  You may drop by and talk to our
STUDENTS if you are in the area.  Please arrange for your own appointment
during visits.  If you would like to correspond with one of our student
representatives, you may send e-mail to: bureaucrats@cs.Stanford.EDU.

Thank you for your interest in Stanford University.  Please do not hesitate to
contact us if you have any questions.







