From inforequests@cc.gatech.edu Wed Nov  2 12:07:20 1994
Status: RO
X-VM-v5-Data: ([nil nil nil nil t nil nil t nil]
	["9047" "Wed" "2" "November" "1994" "12:07:01" "-0500" "CoC Information Request Processor" "inforequests@cc.gatech.edu" "<199411021707.MAA21154@burdell.cc.gatech.edu>" "197" "Re: Gradschool Application & Information" "^From:" nil nil "11"])
Received: from burdell.cc.gatech.edu (burdell.cc.gatech.edu [130.207.3.207]) by cs.oberlin.edu (8.6.4/8.6.4) with ESMTP id MAA03152 for <jmankoff@cs.oberlin.edu>; Wed, 2 Nov 1994 12:07:19 -0500
Received: (from daemon@localhost) by burdell.cc.gatech.edu (8.6.9/8.6.9) id MAA21154 for jmankoff@cs.oberlin.edu; Wed, 2 Nov 1994 12:07:01 -0500
Message-Id: <199411021707.MAA21154@burdell.cc.gatech.edu>
From: CoC Information Request Processor <inforequests@cc.gatech.edu>
Apparently-To: jmankoff
Subject: Re: Gradschool Application & Information
Date: Wed, 2 Nov 1994 12:07:01 -0500

Graduate Admissions Information, as well as instructions on completing the
graduate application via computer, is now available online via anonymous ftp
to ftp.cc.gatech.edu in the directory /pub/coc/coc_graduate_info. Please read
the README file first.

However, if you need additional assistance with requesting graduate
admissions materials, please contact carolyn@cc.gatech.edu.

from the ftp stuff:
This ftp site should include all of the information you need to successfully
apply to the Master's or Doctoral program at the College of Computing.

Please note that the College of Computing admits new Master's (MS) and
Doctoral (PhD) students only for Fall quarters. The deadlines for applying to 
the College are as follows (Please note that these deadlines apply to the 
College of Computing ONLY):

        Feb. 1: PhD deadline for Fall quarter (late Sept.)
        June 1: MS deadline for Fall quarter (late Sept.)



The contents of the "coc_graduate_info" ftp site are as follows:

INTERNATIONAL, This DIRECTORY contains the following files that each
        international applicant needs to complete and/or read: 

        non-citizens.info, (information for international students), 
       non-citizens.ps, (This postscript file, Information from Non-Citizens,
                must be printed, completed, and sent to the Office of 
                Registrar/Graduate Admissions),
        summary.ps, (This postscript file, Summary of Your Educational
                Experiences by Years, must be printed, completed, and sent
                to the Office of Registrar/Graduate Admissions.)
        intensive.english, (This file contains information about the
                Intensive English Program at Georgia Tech).

application,  This file gives you information and instructions on applying
        ONLINE and paying no application fee. Applying online can only be
       done by U.S. Citizens and Permanent Residents.

co-op, This file contains information about the Graduate Cooperative Program
        at Georgia Tech

coc.info, This file contains information on the following: Programs of
        Study, Areas, Research Facilities, Financial Aid, Living and Housing 
        Costs, Enrollment, Location, The Institute, Applying, and Academic 
        Faculty.

costs, This file contains information about fees.
fin.aid, This file contains information about financial aid.

gre.info, This file contains information about gre requirements as well as
        addresses and telephone numbers to the GRE/Educational Testing 
        Service offices.

info.sheet.ps, This POSTSCRIPT file is the Graduate Admissions Information
        Sheet that should be completed and returned to: Graduate 
        Admissions/College of Computing.

ms.requirements, This file lists the requirements for the MS program in
        letter form.

multi.ps, This POSTSCRIPT file contains information about two
        multidisciplinary programs, Management of Technology and Computer 
        Integrated Manufacturing, and a form for requesting more information
        about these programs. 

phd.requirements, This file lists the requirements for the PhD program in
        letter form.

phd.rules.ps, This postscript file contains the rules and regulations of the
        Doctoral program.

phone.numbers, This file is a list of important phone numbers.


research.brochure.ps, This postscript file is th comparable to a College of
       Computing catalog

For a complete MS application packet, please follow the checklist:

        1. Get and read the following files: application, coc.info, costs,
           co-op, gre.info, fin.aid, ms.requirements, phone.numbers, 
           info.sheet.ps, research.brochure.ps and multi.ps.
        2. Complete the Online application. Read the "application" file for 
           instructions. Applying online can only be done by U.S. Citizens 
          and Permanent Residents. (Please read "application" thoroughly.)
        3. Complete a personal biography and three letters of recommendation. 
           When your online application is submitted, a verification form
           will be mailed to you along with forms for your personal biography 
          and letters of recommendation from the Office of the
           Registrar/Graduate Admissions. Please send the bio and the three
           letters of recommendations to: Graduate Admissions/College of 
           Computing.
        4. Two official transcripts from all colleges and/or universities
           you have attended to the Office of the Registrar/Graduate
           Admissions.
        5. Computer Science Subject AND General GRE scores to the Office of
           Registrar/Graduate Admissions.
        6. Get info.sheet.ps, print, complete and send to: Graduate
          Admissions/College of Computing

For International applicants ONLY ((Additional instructions to above):
        7. Get the following files: intensive.english, non-citizens.info,
           non-citizens.ps, and summary.ps from the INTERNATIONAL directory.
       8. TOEFL scores (if applicable) to the Office of the
           Registrar/Graduate Admissions.
        9. Print, complete and send "summary.ps" to Office of the
          Registrar/Graduate Admissions.
      10. Print, complete and send "non-citizens.ps" to the Office of the
           Registrar/Graduate Admissions.

For a complete PhD application process, please follow the checklist:

        1. Get and read the following files: application, coc.info, costs, 
           gre.info, fin.aid, phd.requirements, phone.numbers,
info.sheet.ps, 
           phd.rules.ps, research.brochure.ps  and multi.ps.
        2. Complete the Online application. Read the "application" file for 
           instructions. Applying online can only be done by U.S. Citizens 
          and Permanent Residents. (Please read "application" thoroughly.)
        3. Complete a personal biography and three letters of recommendation. 
           When your online application is submitted, a verification form
           will be mailed to you along with forms for your personal biography 
          and letters of recommendation from the Office of the
           Registar/Graduate Admissions. Please send the bio and the three
           letters of recommendations to: Graduate Admissions/College of 
           Computing.
        4. Two official transcripts from all colleges and/or universities
           you have attended to the Office of the Registrar/Graduate Admissions 
           Office.
        5. Computer Science Subject AND General GRE scores to the Office of
           Registrar/Graduate Admissions.
        6. Get info.sheet.ps, print, complete and send to: Graduate
          Admissions/College of Computing

For International applicants ONLY (Additional instructions to above):
        7. Get the following files: intensive.english, non-citizens.info,
           non-citizens.ps, and summary.ps from the INTERNATIONAL directory.
       8. TOEFL scores (if applicable) to the Office of the
           Registrar/Graduate Admissions.
        9. Print, complete and send "summary.ps" to Office of the
          Registrar/Graduate Admissions.
      10. Print, complete and send "non-citizens.ps" to the Office of the
           Registrar/Graduate Admissions.


A short overview of where application materials should be sent to for both
programs. Please note that these are two different addresses. One address is
the Graduate Admissions main office for the entire Georgia Tech campus and 
the other is the Graduate Admissions office for the College of Computing:

Mail the following to:
Office of the Registrar/Graduate Admissions
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0321
USA

        Online Application (automatically sent if applying online)
       Application
        2 Official Transcripts from all colleges and universities attended
        GRE scores - General & CS Subject
       
        INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS ONLY:
        TOEFL (if applicable)for International Students 600 or above
        Information from Non-citizens (non-citizens.ps)
        Summary of Your Educational Experiences by Years (summary.ps)

Mail the following to:
Graduate Admissions
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0280

        Graduate Admissions Information Sheet (info.sheet.ps)
        Three Letters of Recommendation
        Personal Biography
          

If you would like to order a General Catalog for Georgia Tech, please send
your COMPLETE mailing address along with $2 to:

        OFFICE OF THE REGISTRAR
        Georgia Institute of Technology
        Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0315

If you want a hard copy of the application or any other admissions
materials, email carolyn@cc.gatech.edu.

If you have any questions, comments, suggestions, or problems with this ftp 
site, email de@cc.gatech.edu.

Please read the file README
 it was last modified on Thu Jan 13 11:52:03 1994 - 293 days ago
siwenna.cc.gatech.edu:/pub/coc/graduate_info
(Mail) ncftp>

