From admit@cs.unc.edu Mon Jun 27 15:08:09 1994
Status: RO
X-VM-v5-Data: ([nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil]
	["78545" "Mon" "27" "June" "1994" "15:07:56" "-0400" "UNC Admissions" "admit@cs.unc.edu" nil "1742" "Re: Gradschool Application & Information" "^From:" nil nil "6"])
Received: from mcenroe.cs.unc.edu (mcenroe.cs.unc.edu [152.2.128.184]) by cs.oberlin.edu (8.6.4/8.6.4) with ESMTP id PAA26001 for <jmankoff@cs.oberlin.edu>; Mon, 27 Jun 1994 15:08:02 -0400
Received: from tybee.cs.unc.edu by mcenroe.cs.unc.edu (8.6.9/UNC_06_21_94)
	id PAA02508; Mon, 27 Jun 1994 15:07:59 -0400
Received: by tybee.cs.unc.edu (8.6.9/UNC_06_21_94)
	id PAA09169; Mon, 27 Jun 1994 15:07:58 -0400
In-Reply-To: <199406241622.MAA06103@cs.oberlin.edu>
Message-ID: <Pine.3.89.9406271551.G9114-0100000@tybee>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII
From: UNC Admissions <admit@cs.unc.edu>
To: Jen Mankoff <jmankoff>
Subject: Re: Gradschool Application & Information
Date: Mon, 27 Jun 1994 15:07:56 -0400 (EDT)

******************************************************************

If, after reading this brochure you cannot find answers to all of 
your questions, or need more information, please contact Janet 
Jones, Student Services Manager, at 919-962-1900 Mondays through 
Fridays from 3-5 p.m. EST, or send e-mail to admit@cs.unc.edu.

******************************************************************

		DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE
			GRADUATE STUDIES

		THE UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA
			AT CHAPEL HILL
		            1994

	   	      Updated:	12/7/93
		      Revised:   5/9/94

****CONTENTS****
Environment
	The Research Triangle
	Our Department
Research
The Faculty
Adjunct Faculty
Facilities
	General Computing Environment
	Research Laboratories
	Libraries
Admissions and Graduate Studies
	Student Distribution
	Admissions Requirements
	Degree Programs and Requirements
	Financial Support
Courses for Graduate Students
M.S. Requirements
Ph.D. Requirements
Faculty Internet E-mail Addresses
For Further Information




****ENVIRONMENT****
Chapel Hill, a town of about 40,000 located in central North 
Carolina, blends a mild climate, a relaxed Southern 
atmosphere, and the charm of what is often called the 
nation's "perfect college town," with such cultural 
advantages as excellent theater and music, an art museum, and 
a planetarium.  Sports abound, and the Carolina beaches, Cape 
Hatteras, Great Smoky Mountains National Park, and the Blue 
Ridge Mountains are only a few hours away.

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill was the first 
state university to open its doors, in 1795.  The 689-acre 
central campus is also among the most beautiful in the 
country.  UNC-CH is consistently ranked one of the nation's 
very best major public universities.  In 1991, for example, 
U.S. News and World Report ranked UNC-CH fifth overall among 
public institutions and 25th among all national universities.  
Of the approximately 24,000 students enrolled, almost 9,000 
are graduate and professional students.  

THE RESEARCH TRIANGLE
The Research Triangle of North Carolina is formed by UNC-CH, 
Duke University in Durham, and North Carolina State 
University (NC State) in Raleigh.  The universities have a 
combined enrollment of approximately 60,000 students; have 
libraries with more than eight million volumes with inter-
connected catalogues; and have national prominence in a 
variety of disciplines.

At the center of the Triangle lies Research Triangle Park 
(RTP), set in 6,800 acres of North Carolina pinelands.  RTP 
is one of the largest research parks in the United States, 
and includes more than 50 corporations, government agencies, 
and institutions employing approximately 34,000 people.  
Research and development in microelectronics, computers, and 
communications are conducted by companies such as IBM, Data 
General, Northern Telecom, Bell Northern Research, and 
General Electric.  The collaboration between the academic and 
corporate communities creates a synergy unsurpassed in the 
scientific arena.  The Park is located within 20 minutes of 
the triangle universities, and five miles from Raleigh-Durham 
International Airport.

MCNC, also located in the Park, is a private, non-profit 
corporation working with North Carolina universities and 
industry on research and education in microelectronics, 
communications, and supercomputing.  Campuses connected 
through MCNC's interactive audio/video network include Duke, 
UNC-CH, NC State, East Carolina, UNC-Asheville, North 
Carolina A&T State, Winston-Salem State, UNC-Charlotte, UNC-
Wilmington, Appalachian State, the four medical schools, and 
Research Triangle Institute.  Six additional universities 
will be connected in 1994.  

The Department's growth is a consequence of the regionUs 
economic development.  We see our task as contributing to the 
research and educational needs of a growing regional 
concentration of high technology, and to the national and 
international computer science communities.


OUR DEPARTMENT
The Department of Computer Science at UNC-CH was one of the 
first in the United States to be established as an 
independent department, in 1964.  Its primary missions are 
graduate teaching and research, and it offers graduate degree 
programs only.  Most of our 150 students are full time.  
Undergraduate instruction is limited to service courses and 
to participating in the Computer Sciences Options of the 
Applied Sciences and Mathematical Sciences Curricula.  

Two closely related graduate degrees are offered.  The Ph.D. 
program prepares teachers and researchers for positions with 
universities, government, and industry.  The M.S. program 
prepares highly competent and broadly skilled practitioners.  
The curricula are oriented toward the design and application 
of real computer systems and toward that portion of theory 
that guides and supports practice.

The Computer Science Students Association sponsors both 
professional and social events and represents the students in 
departmental matters.  Its president is a voting member at 
faculty meetings.  There is much interaction between students 
and faculty, and students contribute to nearly every aspect 
of the Department's operation.




***RESEARCH****
The Department is actively engaged in research 
on a broad range of topics.  The index provided below should 
serve as a pointer to faculty members who have research 
interests in these topics.

Algorithms and data structures
Anderson, Halton, Hedlund, Jeffay, Manocha, Nyland, Plaisted, 
Prins, Singh, Stanat

Computer architectures
Brooks, Chi, Halton, Hedlund, Mago, Marshall, Molnar, Poulton, 
Singh, Wright

Computer graphics, image processing, vision
Beard, Bishop, Brooks, Burbeck, Coggins, Eyles, Fuchs, Halton, 
Lastra, Manocha, Marshall, Molnar, Pizer, Poulton, Rolland, 
Rosenman, Wright

Computer-supported cooperative work
Abdel-Wahab, Beard, Calingaert, Dewan, Jeffay, D. K. Smith, F. D. 
Smith, J. B. Smith, Stotts, Weiss

Distributed systems
Abdel-Wahab, Anderson, Calingaert, Dewan, Groves, Jeffay, 
F. D. Smith, Stotts

Functional and logic programming
Mago, Plaisted, Prins, Stanat

Geometric and solid modeling
Brooks, Halton, Manocha, Molnar, Pizer, Wright

Human-machine interaction
Beard, Bishop, Brooks, Burbeck, Calingaert, Chi, Coggins, Dewan, 
Eyles, Fuchs, Pizer, Rolland, Rosenman, D. K. Smith, F. D. Smith, 
J. B. Smith, Stotts, Wright

Monte Carlo methods
Halton

Neural networks
Marshall, Pizer

Parallel computing
Anderson, Chi, Eyles, Fuchs, Halton, Hedlund, Lastra, Mago, 
Manocha, Marshall, Molnar, Nyland, Poulton, Prins, Singh, Stanat

Real-time systems
Abdel-Wahab, Chi, Fuchs, Jeffay, Rosenman, F. D. Smith

Software engineering and environments
Coggins, Dewan, Groves, Jeffay, Nyland, Prins, D. K. Smith, F. D. 
Smith, J. B. Smith, Stotts

Text processing
Dewan, D. K. Smith, J. B. Smith, Stotts, Weiss

Theorem proving and term rewriting
Plaisted

VLSI systems and design
Bishop, Chi, Eyles, Fuchs, Hedlund, Marshall, Molnar, 
Poulton, Singh



****THE FACULTY****
James Anderson, Assistant Professor,  Ph.D. 1990, Texas-Austin.  
Distributed and concurrent algorithms; fault-tolerant computing; 
real-time systems; formal methods.

Gary Bishop, Research Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1984, UNC-
Chapel Hill. Hardware and software for man-machine 
interaction; 3D interactive computer graphics.

Frederick P. Brooks, Jr., Kenan Professor, Ph.D. 1956, 
Harvard.  3D interactive computer graphics; virtual worlds; 
molecular graphics; computer architecture.

Christina Burbeck, Research Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1981, California-Irvine.  
Visual perception; visual object representation; visual background 
representation; virtual worlds.
 
Peter Calingaert, Professor, Ph.D. 1955, Harvard.  Computer-
supported cooperative work; communication, control, 
translator, and application software systems.

Vernon L. Chi,  Research Lecturer and Director of the 
Microelectronic Systems Laboratory, B.S. 1964, Antioch.  
Hardware design environments; system engineering and 
integration; microtechnology; signal and clock distribution.

James M. Coggins, Assoc. Professor and Assoc. Chairman for 
Academic Affairs, Ph.D. 1983, Michigan State.  Artificial 
visual systems; pattern recognition; computer graphics; 
human-computer interaction; object-oriented design and 
programming.

Prasun Dewan, Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1986, Wisconsin-
Madison.  User interfaces, distributed collaboration, 
software engineering environments, and object-oriented 
databases. 

John G. Eyles, Research Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1982, UNC-
Chapel Hill. Graphics architectures; rapid system 
prototyping; virtual worlds; VLSI design.

Henry Fuchs, Federico Gil Professor, Ph.D. 1975, Utah.  High-
performance graphics hardware; 3D medical imaging; head-
mounted display and virtual environments.

John H. Halton, Professor, D.Phil. 1960, Oxford.  
Applications of combinatorial and probabilistic methods, and 
scientific and mathematical analysis, to computational, 
scientific, and engineering problems.

Kye S. Hedlund, Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1982, Purdue.  
Computer-aided design; computer architecture; algorithm 
design and analysis; parallel processing.

Kevin Jeffay, Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1989, Washington.  Real-
time systems; operating systems; distributed systems; 
multimedia networking; computer-supported cooperative work; 
performance evaluation.

Anselmo A. Lastra, Research Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1988, 
Duke.  Computer graphics; parallel computing.

Gyula A. Mago, Professor, Ph.D. 1970, Cambridge.  Parallel 
computation; computer architecture; programming languages.

Dinesh Manocha, Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1992, California-
Berkeley.  Geometric and solid modeling; physical-based 
modeling; computer graphics; symbolic and scientific 
computation.

Jonathan A. Marshall, Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1989, Boston.  
Neural network modeling; visual computation and perception; 
learning, adaptation, and self-organization; computational 
neuroscience.

Ralph A. Mason, Lecturer and Assoc. Chairman for 
Administration, M.B.A. 1976, American.  Resource analysis; 
engineering economics.

Steven E. Molnar, Research Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1991, UNC-
Chapel Hill.  Architectures for real-time computer graphics; 
VLSI-based system design; parallel rendering algorithms.

Lars S. Nyland, Research Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1991, Duke.  
High-level programming languages; parallel algorithms; 
program transformation techniques.

Stephen M. Pizer, Kenan Professor, Ph.D. 1967, Harvard.  
Image analysis and display; human and computer vision; 
graphics; numerical computing; medical imaging.

David A. Plaisted, Professor, Ph.D. 1976, Stanford.  Term 
rewriting systems; mechanical theorem proving; logic 
programming; algorithms. 

John Poulton, Research Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1980, UNC-
Chapel Hill.  Graphics architectures; VLSI-based system 
design; design tools; rapid system prototyping.

Jan F. Prins, Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1987, Cornell.  High-
level programming languages; formal techniques in program 
development; highly parallel computing.  

Jannick P. Rolland, Research Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1990, 
Arizona-Tucson. Image quality for medical imaging; perception 
in virtual environments; optics for head-mounted displays.

Raj K. Singh, Research Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1986, SUNY-
Albany.  High-performance systems design and integration; CAD 
tools; parallel architectures and algorithms; VLSI design and 
fabrication; networking; computational biology.

Dana Kay Smith, Research Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1987, Yale.  
Human-computer interaction; computer-supported cooperative 
work; interface design; computer training.

John B. Smith, Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1970, UNC-Chapel Hill.  
Computer-supported cooperative work; hypermedia systems; 
human-computer interaction; text and natural language 
processing. 

Donald F. Stanat, Professor, Ph.D. 1966, Michigan.  Algorithm 
design and analysis; data structures; program verification; 
functional programming languages.

David Stotts, Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1985, Virginia.  
Computer-supported cooperative work; hypermedia; software 
engineering and formal methods; programming languages and 
concurrency. 

Jeannie M. Walsh, Lecturer, M.S. 1984, Oklahoma State.  
Computer education.

Stephen F. Weiss, Professor and Chairman, Ph.D. 1970, 
Cornell.  Information storage and retrieval; natural language 
processing; communications and distributed systems; computer-
supported cooperative work.

Turner Whitted, Research Professor, Ph.D. 1978, NC State.  
Computer graphics. 

William V. Wright, Research Professor, Ph.D. 1972, UNC-Chapel 
Hill.  Interactive systems for scientific research; 
visualization of scientific data; architecture and 
implementation of computing systems.


ADJUNCT FACULTY
Hussein Abdel-Wahab, Adjunct Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1976, 
Waterloo.  Computer-supported cooperative work; 
communications software and distributed systems; operating 
systems and networking.

David V. Beard, Adjunct Asst. Professor, Ph.D. 1985, 
Michigan.  Human-computer interaction with applications in 
radiology; practical GOMS modeling; 2D/3D navigation and 
manipulation; multiparameter image visualization.

William E. Groves, Adjunct Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1962, 
Illinois-Urbana-Champaign.  Distributed systems; expert 
systems; scientific computing.  

Julian Rosenman, Adjunct  Assoc. Professor, M.D. 1977, 
Southwestern; Ph.D. 1971, Texas-Austin.  Computer graphics 
for treatment of cancer patients; contrast enhancement of 
poor quality x-rays.

F. Donelson Smith, Adjunct Assoc. Professor, Ph.D. 1978, UNC-
Chapel Hill.  Distributed systems; computer-supported 
cooperative work; operating systems; computer networks.




****CONTRACTS AND GRANTS****

Principal                        Funding Agency                 Project Title
Investigators

J. Anderson		   National Science Foundation	  Synchronization
							  Mechanisms for High
							  Performance 
							  Computing

J. Anderson		   UNC at Chapel Hill		  Junior Faculty 
							  Development

F. P. Brooks, Jr.          Defense Advanced Research      Advanced Technology
H. Fuchs                   Projects Agency                for Portable Personal
                                                          Visualization

F. P. Brooks, Jr.          National Institutes of         Interactive Graphics
                           Health                         for Molecular Studies

V. L. Chi                  Corporation for National       VISTAnet:  A Very
H. Fuchs                   Research Initiatives           High Bandwidth
J. Rosenman                                               Prototype Network for
                                                          Interactive 3D
                                                          Medical Imaging

V. L. Chi                  National Institutes of         CISE Institutional
S. M. Schwab               Health                         Infrastructure
S. F. Weiss                                               Program for
                                                          Prototyping Complete
                                                          Digital Systems

V. L. Chi                  National Institutes of         Clock Planes for
                           Health                         Synchronism Systems
                                                          on PC Boards

J. M. Coggins              National Institutes of         Pattern Analysis
                           Health                         of Corneal Typography

H. Fuchs                   National Science Foundation/   Supercomputing
J. Poulton                 Defense Advanced Research      Power for
                           Projects Agency                Interactive
                                                          Visualization

H. Fuchs                   National Science Foundation/   Science and
F. P. Brooks, Jr.          Defense Advanced Research      Technology Research
V. L. Chi                  Projects Agency                Center in Computer
                                                          Graphics and
                                                          Scientific
                                                          Visualization

H. Fuchs                   National Science Foundation    Workshop on
G. Bishop                                                 Virtual Reality

K. Jeffay                  National Science Foundation    Processor and Resource
                                                          Allocation Problems
                                                          in Hard-Real-Time
                                                          Systems:  Theory and
                                                          Practice

K. Jeffay                  UNC at Chapel HIll             An Empirical
                                                          Determination of the
                                                          Limits of Human
                                                          Perception of
                                                          Properties of Digital
                                                          Audio and Video
                                                          Streams

K. Jeffay                  UNC at Chapel HIll             Faculty Research Award

D. Manocha                 UNC at Chapel HIll             Junior Faculty
                                                          Development Award

J. A. Marshall             National Eye Institute         Development of
                                                          Non-Local Cortical
                                                          Circuits for 3D Vision

J. A. Marshall             Office of Naval Research       Self-organization of
                                                          Neural Mechanisms for
                                                          Perceptual
                                                          Stabilization of
                                                          Moving Visual Objects
                                                          Under Occlusion,
                                                          Transformations,
                                                          Distortions, and Noise

J. A. Marshall             UNC at Chapel HIll             Junior Faculty
                                                          Development Award

S. M. Pizer                National Institutes of         Medical Image
                           Health                         Presentation

S. M. Pizer                National Science Foundation    Visualization in
                                                          Biomedical
                                                          Computing, l992
                                                          Conference


D. A. Plaisted             National Science Foundation    Hyper-Linking with
                                                          Equality and Semantics

D. A. Plaisted             UNC at Chapel HIll             Faculty Research Award

J. F. Prins                Army Research Office           Fluid Flow and
                                                          Contaminant Transport
                                                          in Heterogeneous
                                                          Multiphase Systems

J. F. Prins                Defense Advanced Research      A Prototyping
                           Projects Agency                System for Parallel
                                                          and Distributed
                                                          Applications

J. F. Prins                Environmental Protection       Parallel Computation
                           Agency                         of Air Quality
                                                          Simulation Models

R. K. Singh                National Science Foundation    Bioscan:  A
V. L. Chi                                                 VLSI-based System
                                                          for Biosequence
                                                          Analysis

F. D. Smith                IBM                            Research and Teaching
S. F. Weiss                                               Agreement

J. B. Smith                National Science Foundation    Building and Using a
F. D. Smith, et al.                                       Collaboratory:  a
                                                          Foundation for
                                                          Supporting and
                                                          Studying Group
                                                          Collaborations

P. D. Stotts               National Science Foundation    Distributed
                                                          Concurrent Hypertext

W. V. Wright               National Science Foundation    Micro-Teleoperation at
                                                          Atomic Scale

Total grants, contracts, and gifts (FY9-P93):   $7 million



****FACILITIES****
Sitterson Hall, opened in 1987, provides 74,000 square feet of 
sophisticated, state-of-the-art research facilities and office 
space for all members of the Department.  The building is 
organized in 'clusters' to create research communities featuring 
laboratories and open conference areas to facilitate interaction 
among students and faculty.  

Graduate students have access to all Departmental research and 
teaching facilities.  These include several specialized research 
laboratories for graphics and image processing, design and 
building of computers, distributed systems, parallel systems, 
software development, and collaborative systems.  The laboratories 
are bound together by the Department's fully integrated, 
distributed computing environment.


GENERAL COMPUTING ENVIRONMENT
The computing environment includes more than 450 computers, 
ranging in performance from 3 million instructions per second 
(MIPS) to more than 77 MIPS.  These systems are integrated by 
means of high-speed networks and by software that is consistent at 
a user level over the many architectural platforms.  Moreover, 
several of the Department's research laboratories include 
specialized equipment and facilities, described in the section 
"Research laboratories."

General computing systems include more than 25 Sun workstations, 
180 DEC workstations, 20 HP workstations, 7 IBM workstations, 180 
Apple Macintosh systems, and 20 IBM personal computers, supported 
by 200 gigabytes of magnetic disk space and 40 gigabytes of 
optical storage.  Main memory on each computer ranges from 4 
megabytes to 512 megabytes, totalling more than 2 gigabytes across 
all of these systems.  Output facilities include high-speed dot-
matrix printers, laser printers, color printers and plotters, 
slide makers, and transparency-making equipment.

The parallel computing facilities comprise both the DepartmentUs 
own designs, such as the Pixel-Planes 5 graphics engine, a 
massively parallel computer, and a commercial MasPar MP-1 
computing system.  The latter provides 8,192 processors and 512 
megabytes of main memory in a SIMD architecture and can execute up 
to four billion (32-bit) integer operations per second.  An HiPPI 
interface and an eight spindle parallel disk array are attached 
via a high-speed I/O subsystem.

Our primary software environment consists of the Unix operating 
system, AFS File System, and Motif Windowing System.  Languages 
most commonly used include C, C++, and Prolog.  Document 
preparation is usually accomplished via Macintosh systems.  Our 
extensive software holdings are continually evolving. 

The communications facilities include an FDDI and Ethernet router, 
an integrated voice/data switch, and video switches, which serve 
as the hubs of an extensive network of cabling that reaches into 
each office to provide voice, data, and video networking 
capabilities.  The campus broadband provides extended Ethernet 
service to other facilities on campus and connects the Department 
to the CoNCert network, allowing us to reach any network in the 
world.  CoNCert is the state-wide network that links research and 
educational institutions.  Our two-way video classroom and 
teleconference room allow connection to any institution served by 
the network.  Courses are shared among the institutions via two-
way, interactive video teleclassing, and CoNCert substantially 
widens the course, concentration, and advising opportunities 
available to students at participating universities.  A two-way 
broadband network permits building-wide distribution of motion 
video.  The network also incorporates a satellite earth station.

The Department also has access to computing facilities at the 
University's Office of Information Technology, which operates DEC 
VAX systems running VMS, an IBM mainframe running MVS, and a 
Convex supercomputer running Unix.  We have access to the Cray YMP 
at the North Carolina Supercomputer Center.

Almost every student is assigned to a one- or two-person office, 
with a few in larger, three-person offices.  Each student has a 
private computer. 


RESEARCH LABORATORIES
The Collaboratory supports research and teaching in computer-
supported cooperative work, distributed and real-time systems, 
hypermedia, and human-computer interaction, including both 
empirical and theoretical studies.  Research conducted in this 
laboratory is motivated by the driving problem of creating 
computer and communication systems to aid collaboration in teams 
of technical professionals working in physically separate 
locations.  An interdisciplinary team of computer scientists, 
cognitive psychologists, and anthropologists uses the laboratory 
for several research projects in these areas.  Specialized 
equipment includes facilities for research in multimedia, 
including both analog and digital video and audio systems.

The Graphics and Image Laboratory supports research and teaching 
in computer graphics, image processing, virtual environments, 
computer vision, and pattern recognition.  Specialized image-
generating systems include the UNC-CH's unique Pixel-Planes 5 
machine, a scalable 3D graphics multicomputer containing more than 
250,000 processors; two Silicon Graphics Onyx computers with 
Reality Engine2 graphics; a Silicon Graphics Power Series 460VGX 
computer; a Silicon Graphics Indy workstation; several DEC 3100 
and DEC 5000 graphics workstations; several Hewlett Packard 700 
series workstations; and high-precision color monitors.  Most 
displays can be viewed in stereo.  Interaction devices include an 
Argonne robotic manipulator, a Sarcos telerobotic arm, an optical 
ceiling tracking system, Virtual Research head-mounted displays, 
head-mounted displays that were designed and built in this 
department, Polhemus 3D tracking systems, a voice recognition 
system, joysticks, mouse devices, data tablets, and other 
commercial and inhouse-designed manual input devices.  The 
laboratory has extensive facilities for recording, editing, and 
producing high-quality video.

The Microelectronic Systems Laboratory (MSL) provides facilities 
for building prototypes of a variety of microtechnology-based 
systems to support research in the application of information 
processing in a multidisciplinary context.  Custom designed and/or 
off-the-shelf VLSI and MEMS, as well as conventional components, 
are used to design, develop, and build systems from small-scale, 
proof-of-concept prototypes through systems of significant size 
and complexity such as the Pixel-Planes family of graphics systems 
and the optical ceiling tracker.  A full-time staff of research 
faculty and engineers provides continuity of know-how and 
economically leverages new research thrusts.  Extensive facilities 
and state-of-the-art equipment support the use of electronic, 
optical, mechanical, and other relevant technologies.  A well 
developed network of component suppliers and service organizations 
is maintained, as well as an extensive in-house suite of powerful 
CAD/CAM tools.  The MSL is an exceptional academic prototyping 
laboratory with a well established, world-class track record.

The SoftLab Software Systems Laboratory has as its primary 
objective to provide the DepartmentUs experimental research 
efforts in VLSI and distributed systems design with a 
software development (and manufacturing) environment 
optimized for rapid prototyping of novel architectures.  
SoftLab integrates imported, customized, and internally 
designed and implemented tools into a Rtool suite,S providing 
users with the flexibility and ease of application 
development needed to facilitate evaluation and proof-of-
concept development efforts.  To date, SoftLab has imported 
or developed compilers, operating systems, programming 
environments, the Interface Description Language (IDL) 
Toolkit, device drivers, networking, and telecommunication 
applications software.  SoftLab also offers software 
engineering support to software developers in research 
groups.  This support includes establishing standards for 
documenting, testing, and configuration management and 
promoting object-oriented programming methods.  Finally, 
SoftLab provides a software manufacturing and distribution 
facility that makes available to other university and 
commercial efforts the fruits of our DepartmentUs research 
efforts, including the SoftLab tool suite itself.

LIBRARY
Students have access to the entire University library system, 
which includes three major centralized and several satellite 
libraries that contain more than 3.5 million volumes, as well as 
those at nearby North Carolina State and Duke universities, with a 
unified on-line searching capability.  

The Brauer Library, next door in Phillips Hall, has extensive 
holdings in mathematics, physics, statistics, operations research, 
and computer science.  


****ADMISSIONS AND GRADUATE STUDIES****

STUDENT DISTRIBUTION
Our graduate student population is very diverse in terms of 
both geographic origin and previous degrees.  Most of our 
approximately 150 students are pursuing a degree full time.  
While computer science and mathematics represent the largest 
number of undergraduate majors among our graduate students, 
other undergraduate and graduate degree majors include 
physics, engineering, the social sciences, and humanities. 
The following are the median credentials for the 35 first-
year students who began our program in fall 1993:

Quantitative GRE	93rd percentile
Verbal GRE		92nd percentile 
			94th (with non-native 
			speakers excluded)
Analytical GRE		93rd percentile
GPA (undergraduate)	3.6


ADMISSIONS REQUIREMENTS
Admissions Requirements.  Admission to the Department is highly 
competitive.  Although we welcome promising students from all 
disciplines, entering students must have a substantial background in 
both mathematics and computer science.  This normally includes at 
least six semester courses in mathematics and six in computer 
science.  We consider knowledge of the following subjects to be 
standard preparation for our graduate program:     

%	differential and integral calculus;
%	discrete mathematics:  sets, relations, functions, algebra;
%	linear algebra or matrix theory;
%	mathematical probability, preferably calculus-based;
%	structured programming techniques;
%	data structures and abstract data types;
%	computer organization;
%	representation of elementary data;
%	programming in an assembler language.

Most entering students will have studied all but two or three of the 
following courses:

%	algorithms and their  analysis;
%	theory of languages and computation;
%	files  and  databases;
%	operating systems;
%	translators;
%	digital logic techniques;
%	numerical computing methods;
%	programming languages;
%	software engineering. 

Outstanding students who have not completed all of these 
requirements are frequently admitted. Preference is given to 
applicants who are solidly prepared, especially in mathematics.  If 
admitted without having completed all the listed requirements, the 
student  must  complete them after admission.    

A baccalaureate degree is required, with a grade point average of at 
least B (3.0/4.0); most entering students have a GPA above 3.5. 

GRE.  High scores on all three parts of the General Aptitude Test of 
the Graduate Record Examination are also required: a minimum of 80th 
percentile on the verbal and 90th percentile on the quantitative and 
analytical sections is expected.  In recent years, entering students 
have averaged more than  90th percentile on the verbal section, 95th 
percentile on the quantitative section, and 90th percentile on the 
analytical section.  Allowances are made in interpreting the verbal 
test scores of applicants whose native language is not English.  
Although GRE Advanced Test scores are not required, applicants are 
encouraged to take the Advanced Test in computer science, 
mathematics, engineering, or physics, if appropriate.

TOEFL.  Applicants whose native language is not English must submit 
TOEFL scores.  We give preference to applicants who score above 600.  

Personal Statement.  Each applicant must submit a short personal 
statement directly to the Department.  The statement should include:

%	objectives in pursuing graduate study;
%	identification of any field of computer science in which you 
	have a particular interest;
%	information relevant to your qualifications for graduate 
	study, but not included in the application (e.g. major 
	academic projects, papers presented or published, and non-
	academic computer experience);
%	an informative title or a brief description of any course 
	listed on your transcript without a title (or with a vague 
	title such as "Mathematics II");
%	a list of all courses taken or planned that do not yet 
	appear on a transcript;
%	an e-mail address, if available.

Please type the statement, if possible.  It should be between half a 
page and two pages long.

Recommendations.  Three letters of recommendation are required.  
Letters written by an applicantUs present or former professors are 
usually more informative than those written by employers or 
colleagues.

Admission is based solely on merit.  UNC is an affirmative action, 
equal opportunity institution.  Prospective applicants who clearly 
surpass the minimum requirements are encouraged to write for 
application materials to:  The Graduate School, CB# 4010, 200 Bynum 
Hall, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,  N.C. 27599-4010, or to call 
(919) 966-2611.

Opportunities.  Most graduate students are supported by 
assistantships during the academic year.  In addition, students are 
encouraged to gain professional experience through summer 
employment.  Many accept positions with government and industry at 
various locations across the country as well as other university 
departments.  Nearby Research Triangle Park also provides 
opportunities to students.  Summer support is available from the 
Department, but for only a limited number of students.


DEGREE PROGRAMS AND REQUIREMENTS
A successful computer scientist must be able to perceive and 
to understand problems often arising from other disciplines 
and to possess the knowledge and skills to develop solutions.  
The course of study for the M.S. degree includes data 
representation, algorithms, programming languages and 
hardware, as well as important areas of application.  Ph.D. 
program requirements subsume those of the M.S. program.  
Students pursue particular areas of their choice and are 
actively involved in research.  

Master of Science.  An M.S. candidate must earn 30 semester 
hours of credit, of which six hours may be transferred from 
another institution.  A thesis is optional; if one is 
written, it counts for six hours.  Course work in the M.S. 
program consists of a core of required courses and a few 
electives.  A student with stronger than minimal preparation 
can substitute more advanced elective courses for core 
courses.  A comprehensive examination is required.  In 
addition, the student must have performed the following:  (1) 
programmed and documented a program product; and (2) written 
a significant piece of technical prose.  Requirement 1 can be 
satisfied by course work, or by presenting satisfactory 
documentation of previous experience.  Requirement 2 can be 
satisfied by a special writing course, or by a thesis.  
Although the M.S. degree has been earned in as little as 12 
months, two academic years are normally required by a student 
with an assistantship.  

Doctor of Philosophy.  A Ph.D. candidate must take several 
elective courses, typically 15 to 18 hours, in addition to 
the courses required in the M.S. program, and must have 
satisfied the two requirements listed above.  Other 
requirements include passing written and oral comprehensive 
examinations, and submitting a dissertation that presents an 
original contribution to knowledge. The normal time needed by 
a full-time student with an assistantship is four or five 
years.  


FINANCIAL SUPPORT
Assistantships and fellowships are available for first-year 
students.  Currently these appointments carry stipends of 
$9,500 for the nine-month academic year 1993-94.  Stipends do 
not include tuition and fees; however, the College provides 
some funds for remission of the out-of-state portion of 
tuition for students who are unable to qualify for North 
Carolina residency.  The net stipend is sufficient to 
maintain an unmarried student for a full calendar year.  
Summer employment is also available at the current rate of 
$500 per week.  To apply for an assistantship, an applicant 
need only check the appropriate item on the admission 
application form.  Applicants for assistantships are 
automatically considered for all available fellowships.  
Students can expect continued support, contingent on 
satisfactory work performance and academic progress.  
Opportunities also exist for part-time employment elsewhere 
in the University and in the Research Triangle area.  All 
students who have desired part-time employment have found 
satisfactory arrangements with little delay.

Deadlines.  The fall semester runs from late August to late 
December; the spring semester from early January to early 
May.  Graduate courses in computer science are not offered 
during the summer.  Applications for fall admission, complete 
with a personal statement, and all transcripts and 
recommendations should be received by the Graduate School no 
later than 31 January.   To ensure meeting that deadline, the 
Graduate Record Examination should be taken no later than 
December.  A few assistantships are sometimes available to 
begin in the spring semester.  To be considered for these 
assistantships, completed applications should be received no 
later than 15 October and the GRE taken no later than June.  
Foreign applicants should have their applications completed 
by 1 January (for fall admission) or 1 October (for spring) 
to allow time for obtaining a visa.



****COURSES****
121	Data Structures (3)
122	Algorithms and Analysis (3)
140	Introduction to Translator Systems (3)
142	Introduction to Operating Systems (3)
145	Software Engineering Laboratory (3)
151	Numerical Computing (3)
170	Applications of Natural Language Processing (3)
171	Natural Language Processing (3)
172	Information Retrieval (3)
181	Models of Languages and Computation (3)
190	Topics in Computer Science (1-3)
212	Operating Systems (1.5)
213	Files and Databases (1.5)
214	Translators (1.5)
216	Digital Logic Techniques (1.5)
217	Programming Languages (1.5)
228	Advanced Analysis of Algorithms (3)
230	Data-Base Management Systems (3)
232	Real-Time Systems (3)
233	Discrete Event Simulation (3)
235	Images, Graphics, and Vision (3)
236	Computer Graphics (3)
238	Raster Graphics (3)
239	Exploring Virtual Worlds (3)
240	Compiler Design (3)
241	Advanced Compiler Design (3)
242	Advanced Operating Systems (3)
243	Distributed Systems (3)
244	Advanced Programming Languages (3)
245	Functional Programming (3)
246	Logic Programming (3)
248	Semantics and Program Correctness (3)
249	Advanced Distributed Systems (3)
252	Monte Carlo Method (3)
253	Monte Carlo Methods (3)
254	Picture Processing and Pattern Recognition (3)
255	Computer Vision (3)
257	Visual Solid Shape (3)
258	Geometric Solid Modeling (3)
261	Computer Architecture and Implementation (3)
265	Advanced Computer Architecture (3)
267	Advanced Computer Implementation (3)
268	VLSI Systems Design (3)
269	Advanced Design of VLSI Systems (3)  
273	Neural Networks (3)
275	Expert Systems (3)
282	Mechanized Mathematical Inference (3)
286	Discrete Optimization:  Algorithms and Complexity (3)
288	Information Theory (3)
289	Error-Correcting Codes (3)
290	Topics in Computer Science (1-3)
291	Professional Writing in Computer Science (3)
321	Technical Communication in Computer Science (1)
322	Seminar in Professional Practice (1)
323	Seminar in Research (1)
324	Computers and Society (1)
345	Software Engineering Seminar (0.5)
390	Research Seminar in Computer Science (0.5-3) 
391	Reading and Research (1-3)
393	Master's Thesis (0-6)
394	Doctoral Dissertation (0-6)

Numbers following course title represent credit hours.


******MASTER OF SCIENCE DEGREE REQUIREMENTS*****
2 May 1994

This document lists the combined requirements of the Graduate School
and of the Department of Computer Science (COMP) and supersedes all
previous issues.  Reference is occasionally made for further details
to the Graduate School Handbook (GSH).  Page references are to the
1992 edition.  Apparent errors in the present document should be
called to the attention of the Director of Graduate Studies.

ADVISING

When a student enrolls, a faculty member is appointed to serve as the
student's program adviser.  If a student elects to write a thesis,
he or she selects a thesis adviser, who normally replaces the program
adviser and chairs the student's committee.  A student who wishes
to change program adviser for some other reason may do so in
consultation with the Director of Graduate Studies.

ADMINISTRATION

The Graduate Studies Committee (a standing committee of the Department
faculty, chaired by the Director of Graduate Studies) interprets
degree requirements, approves plans of study, and acts on petitions
from students to the Department and to the Graduate School.

A full-time Student Services Manager maintains student records,
answers student queries, and directs student requests to the Graduate
Studies Committee and to the Graduate School.  All student requests
should be made through the Student Services Manager, usually on forms
available from the Manager, whose office is Sitterson 133.

COURSE REQUIREMENT

Thirty semester hours of courses must be taken, of which at least 18
hours must be in COMP and may include up to six hours of thesis
research (COMP 393).  The choice of courses is subject to approval by
the Graduate Studies Committee.  Registration in COMP 390 for research
team meetings does not count toward the course requirement.  Other
registration in COMP 390 does count.

Each student is responsible for mastering the content of the following
core courses, but is not specifically required to take any of them.
The student's mastery of content will be tested by the
Comprehensive examination.

	COMP 202	(3 hrs)	Algorithm Analysis
	COMP 203	(3 hrs)	Parallel and Distributed Computing
	COMP 204	(3 hrs)	The Design and Implementation of Software
	COMP 205	(3 hrs)	Scientific and Geometric Computation
	COMP 206	(3 hrs)	Computer Architecture

Up to six semester hours of graduate credit may be transferred from
another accredited institution, or for courses taken at UNC-CH before
admission to the Graduate School, or for courses taken in a different
graduate program at UNC-CH, in partial fulfillment of the 30-hour
requirement (GSH 14-15).  Course transfers must be approved by the
Graduate Studies Committee and by the Graduate School.  Courses taken
at Duke University, N.C. Central University, N.C. State University,
UNC-Charlotte, and UNC-Greensboro count as home courses requiring no
formal transfer (GSH 13-14).

Before completing the first 18 hours of courses, the student shall
submit to the Graduate Studies Committee (on form CS-3) a proposed
plan of study chosen after consultation with (but not necessarily
approved by) the program adviser.  The student may submit a plan early
to find out what will be acceptable, and may specify choices such as
"Course x or Course y", retaining the right to make the choice
later if it is approved.

Each student is strongly urged to elect at least three hours taught by
a department other than COMP, unless the student has an unusually
broad background.

The course modules COMP 220-227 are artifacts of registration that
permit an entering student to take part of a core course for part of
the credit.  Thus a student who is familiar with the content of part
of a core course, but not the whole course, is not forced to choose
between omitting the course and taking all of it.  This helps a
student with more than minimum preparation to make room for more
appropriate courses.

The election of a minor field is optional and infrequent.  If a minor
is elected, it must include at least 9 hours of courses that are
taught by departments other than COMP (and not merely cross-listings
of COMP courses).  The minor must also meet all the requirements
described in GSH 7.

In the rare event that one COMP graduate student takes a course taught
by another COMP graduate student, the Director of Graduate Studies
should be consulted to determine whether credit can be granted.

PROGRAM PRODUCT REQUIREMENT

Each student is required to have programmed and documented a program
product.  A nonexhaustive list of ways to meet the requirement
includes: (1) having been a programmer (not simply a manager) on a
team in the Software Engineering Laboratory course (COMP 145); (2)
having written a large program in industry; and (3) having written a
program product as part of an M.S. thesis or Ph.D. dissertation
project.  The student must file Form CS-13 to document completion of
the requirement.

TECHNICAL WRITING REQUIREMENT

Each student must satisfy a technical writing requirement, and can
elect any one of three options.

Writing Course Option 

The most common method of satisfying the technical writing requirement
is to take the Professional Writing in Computer Science course (COMP
291).  The course includes study of writing techniques and the writing
of a thesis quality paper (approximately 5000 words long) on an
approved topic in computer science.  The paper is reviewed by two
approved readers and revised by the student as necessary.  To satisfy
the writing requirement, the student must receive a passing grade in
COMP 291 and have the course paper judged by the readers to be of
thesis quality with respect to both substance and presentation.  This
must be reported on Form CS-8.

Thesis Option

A written thesis is based either on research or on the solution and
documentation of a substantial problem in application or system
programming.  The subject is chosen jointly by the student and the
thesis adviser.  The student selects a thesis committee, which
normally consists of the thesis adviser plus two other members of the
Graduate Faculty.  The student must submit a brief written thesis
proposal to the committee members during the early stages of thesis
work.  Selection of the committee is described in further detail under
"Committee Composition".

The thesis must meet normal standards of scholarly writing and
prescribed standards of form (GSH 22 and the Graduate School document
A Guide to the Preparation and Submission of Theses and
Dissertations).

The student must register for at least three hours, but not more than
six hours, of thesis (COMP 393).  Registration for COMP 393 can reduce
to 24 the number of hours of non-research courses that the student
must take.

A student who elects to write a thesis must make an oral presentation
of the thesis to the committee.  Before this presentation can take
place, the adviser and at least one other member of the student's
committee must agree that the thesis is in substantially finished
form.  The student may elect that the presentation be public.  In that
event the student gives a 50-minute presentation of the thesis,
followed by questions from the committee and then from the audience.
If the committee wishes, it may continue to question the student in
private.  If the student elects a private presentation, it will be of
such form and duration as are prescribed by the committee.  Public
presentations are encouraged as a means of keeping the faculty and
students of the department informed of current research and
development activities, and to give the student experience in public
speaking.

The thesis presentation is technically a Final Oral examination.  The
student may elect to combine it with the Oral Comprehensive
examination on course work into a single examination, provided that
the scheduling requirements for both have been met.  This election is
independent of whether to present the thesis publicly.

Outside Review Option

A student who has written certain technical material in prior academic
or nonacademic work may use this material to satisfy the writing
requirement.  The student should apply to the Graduate Studies
Committee on Form CS-4.  The relevant documentation should be
attached; it will be returned.  Members of the Committee are normally
willing to sign a non-disclosure agreement and read proprietary
documents in confidence.  Approval requires a two-thirds vote of the
Graduate Studies Committee.

Documents may be accepted as satisfying this option only when the
following conditions have been met.

	a.  The document has technical content and is approximately
	    5000 words long (or longer).
	b.  The document has been reviewed and evaluated for both
	    style and content by at least two readers.
	c.  The review process was unrelated to this writing
	    requirement.
	d.  The review process was such that the result of a negative
	    review would have been rejection of the
	    document.

Documents that clearly satisfy this policy include: (1) Ph.D.
dissertations and M.S. theses with technical content; and (2) articles
(of sufficient length and appropriate content) published in refereed
journals.  Documents that do not satisfy this policy include: (1)
documents published in unrefereed journals; and (2) papers written
primarily to satisfy this requirement.

COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION

At the end of their program of study, students must pass a
Comprehensive examination.  The student may elect either an oral or a
written examination.

The Oral Comprehensive examination, normally about two hours in
length, is held when course work is completed or final courses are in
progress.  A student who elects to write a thesis is examined by the
thesis committee.  A student who elects another writing option is
examined by a committee appointed for the purpose, as described in
further detail under "Committee Composition".  The examination
covers the core courses and all other courses in the student's
approved program of study, excluding COMP 291, up to a maximum of 24
hours of courses if the student elects the thesis option, or 30 hours
if the student elects one of the other two options.

To reduce the number of courses to 30 (24) hours, the student may
specify one or more non-core courses to be excluded.  The relative
emphasis upon the several courses is decided by the examining
committee, which will inform the student of its decision, in writing,
well in advance of the examination.  The student is responsible for
arranging the time and place of the examination.

The Written Comprehensive examination tests the student's mastery
of the core course material.  It is an examination of minimal
comprehensive coverage of the core including the undergraduate
component thereof.  It tests mastery of definitions, concepts, and
approaches.  It may, but need not, have questions integrating material
across courses.  Because it is a test of knowledge, it should require
minimal creativity to pass.  The examination, which lasts not more
than six hours, is offered twice per year.

If failed, the Comprehensive examination may be retaken, only once
(except by petition), after a lapse of at least three months.  The
student may elect an oral or a written form for the second
examination, independently of the form of the first...If the failure
resulted primarily from weakness in a narrow area, the second
examination will normally cover only that area of weakness.  For an
oral examination, the examining committee will notify the student, in
writing, of the scope of the second examination.  For a written
examination, the departmental Examinations Committee will so notify
the student.

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

The student's thesis committee or Comprehensive examination
committee is appointed by the Director of Graduate Studies, on the
recommendation of the student.  The committee must include at least
two full members of the Graduate Faculty; at least one committee
member must hold the rank of Associate Professor or higher.  The
student should use Form CS-5 to propose the composition of the
committee.

FOREIGN LANGUAGE

There is no foreign language requirement.  The faculty believes,
however, that competence in a modern foreign language is an important
asset for a computer scientist.  Therefore it recommends language
study to prospective students.

OTHER REQUIREMENTS

Two semesters of residence credit must be earned (GSH 7, 17-18).  This
is an automatic consequence of completing the 30 semester hours within
5 years at this campus.  Applications for admission to candidacy and
for award of the degree must be filed as stated in GSH 21-22.

All degree requirements must be completed within five calendar years
from the date of the student's first registration in the Graduate
School, whether in COMP or in another graduate program.  As much as
two years of time spent in active military service, the Peace Corps,
or VISTA will not be counted, provided that the Graduate School
approves.  Also, student may request a leave of absence for a
definite, stated time, not to exceed one year.  If the Department and
Graduate School approve, the duration of the leave is not counted
against the time limit (GSH 9). Full-time master's students who are
funded by the Department normally do not receive funding beyond their
fourth semester.

If degree requirements change during a student's stay in the
Department, the student has the option of continuing under the old
rules or switching and satisfying all the new rules.  In other words,
the student can elect any point in time during his or her stay in the
Department and satisfy the rules in effect at that point.

An exception to any rule may be requested for cause by petition.  
Decisions made by individual faculty members or by committees may be appealed
to the Department faculty as a whole.

SUMMARY AND REQUIRED FORMS
(obtainable from the Student Services Manager, 133 Sitterson)

By the end of semester 2

Complete 18 semester hours

Submit Plan of Study (CS-3) indicating how each of the M.S.
requirements has been or will be met


During semester 4

Complete course work (at least 30 hours in approved Plan of Study)

Submit Application for Admission to Candidacy and Degree Card (the
deadline for these forms is about one month after the beginning of the
semester)

Take the Comprehensive examination


Satisfying the program product requirement (can be done at any  time)

Submit Form CS-13


Satisfying the writing requirement (can be done at any  time)

Option 1: 	Pass COMP 291 and have the associated paper accepted
		by two approved readers (CS-8)

Option 2: 	Have an M.S. thesis committee appointed (CS-5)
		Submit an approved M.S. thesis

	Pass the Final Oral examination (thesis presentation)

Option 3: 	Submit an approved thesis substitute document (CS-4)


Just before you leave . . .

Return office key(s) and building access card to receptionist.



*****DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY DEGREE REQUIREMENTS*****
2 May 1994

This document lists the combined requirements of the Graduate School and of the
Department of Computer Science (COMP) and supersedes all previous issues.
Reference is occasionally made for further details to the Graduate School
Handbook (GSH).  Page references are to the 1992 edition.  Apparent errors in
the present document should be called to the attention of the Director of
Graduate Studies.

ADMISSION TO DOCTORAL PROGRAM

Admission to the doctoral program is by a vote of the faculty and is determined
by performance on the Ph.D. Qualifying examination, course grades (we expect H-
or better in at least half of the courses taken), admissions information,
accomplishment on assistantships, and other testimony from the faculty.

ADVISING

When a student enrolls, a faculty member is appointed to serve as the student's
temporary program adviser.  By the end of the first semester, the student
should select a new adviser whose research interests are closer to those of the
student.  As the student's research interests change and narrow, the student
should change advisers as appropriate.  Changes in adviser should be reported
to the Student Services Manager.

ADMINISTRATION

The Graduate Studies Committee (a standing committee of the Department faculty,
chaired by the Director of Graduate Studies) interprets degree requirements,
approves plans of study, and acts on petitions from students to the Department
and to the Graduate School.

A full-time Student Services Manager maintains student records, answers student
queries, and directs student requests to the Graduate Studies Committee and to
the Graduate School.  All student requests should be made through the Student
Services Manager, usually on forms available from the Manager, whose office is
Sitterson 133.

COURSE REQUIREMENT

Each student is responsible for mastering the content of the following core
courses, but is not specifically required to take any of them.  The student's
mastery of content will be tested by the Doctoral Written examination.

	COMP 202	(3 hrs)	Algorithm Analysis
	COMP 203	(3 hrs)	Parallel and Distributed Computing
	COMP 204	(3 hrs)	The Design and Implementation of Software
	COMP 205	(3 hrs)	Scientific and Geometric Computation
	COMP 206	(3 hrs)	Computer Architecture

Each student is required to take the following course, unless the requirement
is waived, as explained later.

	COMP 321	(1 hr)	Technical Communication in Computer Science

Decisions as to other courses required beyond the core will be left to the
student's doctoral committee with the approval of the Graduate Studies
Committee.  Because proposed Plans of Study are considered individually, and
one student's circumstances are not the same as another's, precedent is not
controlling.

The following are minimum requirements.  The student's committee may impose
further requirements as it judges appropriate.  Unless otherwise specified,
RcourseS means a 3-hour graduate-level course not in the core.  Two
1.5-hour courses may, however, be accepted as equivalent to one 3-hour course.
Taken Ras a graduate studentS does not necessarily mean at UNC-CH, and it
permits the course to have been taken as a UNC-CH post-baccalaureate Continuing
Education student.

1. Primary concentration.  Three or four courses of which at least two support
in depth the specific dissertation topic and at least one supports more
generally the area of computer science in which the dissertation topic falls.
The courses do not need to be related to each other, except in that they
support the dissertation.  These courses may have been taken as an
undergraduate and may have been counted towards an undergraduate degree.

2. Secondary concentration.  One or two courses (two if there are only three
courses in the primary concentration) that are clearly not in the area of
computer science in which the dissertation topic falls.  If there are two
courses, they must be a coherent pair.  These courses may not have been taken
as an undergraduate.

3. Mathematical skills.  One course at upper undergraduate level or higher in
each of two approved areas.  An area is approved if it (a) appears on the
following list, or (b) is designated by the student's committee as specifically
supporting the dissertation topic, or (c) is approved by the Graduate Studies
Committee on the basis of a cogent argument by the student.  These courses do
not need to be related to each other, and may have been taken as an
undergraduate.  A nonexhaustive, illustrative selection of UNC-CH courses
normally approved appears after the name of each area in the list.

	abstract linear algebra (with emphasis on "abstract")	
	MATH 137 (normally preferred), 147 geometry
	COMP 257; MATH 131, 180 graph theory and combinatorics
	MATH 148, 190 mathematical logic PHIL 101, 111 modern algebra
	MATH 134, 138 (normally preferred) probability and statistics
	MATH 120; STAT 101, 102, 126, 127

4. Supporting program.  Two courses outside computer science, each of which is
either a foreign language course or a course that supports the dissertation
topic.  (Two foreign language courses should normally be in the same foreign
language.)  These courses must have been taken as a graduate student, but do
not need to be at a graduate level.  They may include either or both of the
courses taken (if as a graduate student) to satisfy the mathematical skills
requirement.

5. Minor.  The election of a formal minor is optional and infrequent.  If a
minor is elected, it must include at least 15 hours of courses that are taught
by departments other than COMP (and are not merely cross-listings of COMP
courses).  The minor must also meet all the requirements described in GSH 8.

A required course may be waived on the basis of prior study or experience.
(Waivers are not required for core courses.)  The student must secure (on Form
CS-2) the approval of his or her adviser and of the designated instructor.

Relevant graduate courses from other accredited institutions or from other
graduate programs at UNC-CH can be transferred to satisfy any of the foregoing
course requirements (GSH 15).  Course transfers must be approved by the
Graduate Studies Committee and by the Graduate School.  The Graduate School may
require the student to pass an examination on the course content before
approving the transfer.  Courses taken at Duke University, N.C. Central
University, N.C. State University, UNC-Charlotte, and UNC-Greensboro count as
home courses requiring no formal transfer (GSH 13-14).


PROGRAM PRODUCT REQUIREMENT

Each student is required to have programmed and documented a program product.
A nonexhaustive list of ways to meet the requirement includes: (1) having been
a programmer (not simply a manager) on a team in the Software Engineering
Laboratory course (COMP 145); (2) having written a large program in industry;
and (3) having written a program product as part of an M.S. thesis or Ph.D.
dissertation project.  The student must file Form CS-13 to document completion
of the requirement.

FOREIGN LANGUAGE 

There is no foreign language requirement.  The faculty believes, however, that
competence in a modern foreign language is an important asset for a computer
scientist.  Therefore it recommends language study to prospective students.
Moreover, assistantship awards and fellowship recommendations are made taking
language study here into account, so as not to penalize students for any
prolongation of program resulting from language study.

QUALIFYING EXAMINATION

The Ph.D. Qualifying examination is in the form of a series of three oral
examinations of 45-55 minutes each.  These examinations test the ability of
the student to integrate material across subfields of computer science, to
think sharply, to think formally, and to be creative.  The scope of the
examination is set for each student by the departmental Examinations Committee
on the basis of the student's selection of six courses.  The examinations are
given in one period of at most two days, normally once a year in the Spring
Semester, after final examinations and before Commencement.

We expect a student making normal progress and requiring little pre-core
remediation to complete in the first two semesters at least three 200-level
courses, of which at least one requires formal thinking.  Such a student will
be expected to take the examination in the spring ending the first full
academic year.  A student needing more remediation who will not complete those
expected courses in the first two semesters must petition during the first
academic semester for a delay of the Qualifying examination.  The petition
should lay out the planned schedule of courses until the examination and the
proposed time for taking the examination.  Students who take the examination at
the normal time or at the time approved by petition, but who fail the
examination, will be allowed to retake the examination once only, normally one
year later.  Students who defer the examination without approval will not be
allowed to retake it after failure.  Form CS-10 is used to register for the
examination and to petition for deferral.

Each examining committee normally consists of three faculty members.  Each
student takes questions from three different committees.  Each committee
reports a grade and also comments on the examination performance of each
student.  Each committee has a specified area of course work to base their
questions upon, but they are also free to use material from undergraduate
background, excepting that for which the student has not yet completed
remediation.  The questions should normally cross the boundary between courses
or at least between areas in a given course.  Many questions will include
material from at least one core course.  Each committee will need to be able to
ask questions that are different for some students than for others, but where
students have the same course background in the area of the committee, they
should receive the same questions to as great a degree as the oral examination
format allows.

DOCTORAL WRITTEN EXAMINATION

This is a comprehensive examination that tests the student's mastery of the
core course material.  It is identical to the written form of the M.S.
Comprehensive examination.  It is an examination of minimal comprehensive
coverage of the core including the undergraduate component thereof.  It tests
mastery of definitions, concepts, and approaches.  It may but need not have
questions integrating material across courses.  Because it is a test of
knowledge, it should require minimal creativity to pass.  Since it is an
examination of minimal comprehensive coverage of the core, the passing level is
the same for M.S. and Ph.D. students.

The examination, which lasts not more than six hours, is offered twice per
year.  If failed, the examination may be retaken, once only (except by
petition), after a lapse of at least three months (GSH 20).  It is assumed that
for a Ph.D. student, who already will have qualified, the examination will not
form a screen, but rather will test when the student has reached a certain
stage of knowledge.  For the Ph.D. student, the grading of the examination can
lead to declaration of weaknesses.

DOCTORAL ORAL EXAMINATION

The Doctoral Oral examination may be taken by any student who has passed the
Doctoral Written examination, and whose program of study has been approved by
the Graduate Studies Committee.

The examination, normally two to three hours in length, will be administered by
the student's doctoral committee.  The scope of the examination will be
selected by the committee, which will inform the student in writing of its
selection well in advance.  The scope will be limited to testing areas of
weakness identified on the Doctoral Written examination, preparation for
research, and subjects judged by the committee to be relevant to the area of
the student's dissertation.  If, after passing the Doctoral Oral examination,
the student undertakes dissertation research in a different area, the doctoral
committee appointed for the new dissertation may require the student to take a
further Doctoral Oral examination on the new area.

At least one week before the examination, the student must apply to the
Graduate School for a "Permit to Take the Second Doctoral Examination"
(GSH 19).  The student is responsible for arranging the time and place of the
examination.  If failed, the examination may be retaken, once only (except by
petition), after a lapse of at least three months (GSH 20).

DISSERTATION

The candidate must present a dissertation constituting a worthwhile
contribution to knowledge developed by the independent research of the
candidate, meeting scholarly standards of organization, presentation, and
literary merit, and prescribed standards of form (GSH 22 and the Graduate
School document A Guide to the Preparation and Submission of Theses and
Dissertations).  The adviser and at least two other members of the student's
committee will read carefully the entire dissertation.

A cooperative meeting of the student with his or her doctoral committee will be
held to discuss the feasibility of the student's proposed research.  At least
one week before meeting, the student shall submit to the committee a brief
written dissertation proposal defining the scope of the proposed research and
the planned method of attack on the research problem.  The committee will
either approve or reject the plan at this meeting.  The student is responsible
for arranging the time and place of the meeting.  The meeting can either
precede or follow the Doctoral Oral examination, by either a short or a long
interval, at the discretion of the student and committee.  The student is
expected to call a committee meeting at least every six months to discuss the
progress of the dissertation, initially filing and later updating Form CS-7.

The student's doctoral committee consists of at least five persons, a majority
whom must be full members of the Graduate Faculty.  Other committee members may
be faculty from other institutions, scholars from industry, or others whose
expertise is relevant to the dissertation (GSH 20).  At least one committee
member must hold the rank of Associate Professor or higher.  The student names
the committee by submitting the "Recommendation for Composition of Doctoral
Dissertation Committee" form.  For each proposed committee member who is not
on the Graduate Faculty, a curriculum vitae and the Graduate School form
"Recommendation for Appointment to Membership on the Graduate Faculty"
should be attached.  The dissertation adviser serves as committee chair, unless
the adviser is not a COMP faculty member, in which event a COMP faculty member
serves as chair.

The student must register for at least three credit hours of dissertation (COMP
394).

FINAL ORAL EXAMINATION

The Final Oral examination normally consists of a public dissertation defense
confined to the subject area of the dissertation.  The student presents his or
her research for 50 minutes; questions follow from the committee and from the
audience.  If the committee feels it necessary, it may supplement the
dissertation defense by a private examination on other material.  Before the
defense can take place, the adviser and at least two other members of the
student's committee must agree that the dissertation is in substantially
finished form.  The defense should be announced at least two weeks in advance.

OTHER REQUIREMENTS

Four semesters of residence credit must be earned.  At least two of these must
be earned by continuous registration for no fewer than six semester hours per
regular semester or summer session, although registration during the summer is
not required for continuity (GSH 8, 17-18).  Note that a semester in
residence is not identical to a semester of residence credit.

The Department sponsors a colloquium series, which Ph.D. students are expected
to attend.

Each student is normally required to have one semester of classroom teaching
experience including planning, teaching and grading, here or elsewhere.  This
requirement is often satisfied by teaching an undergraduate course in one
semester or summer session, and sometimes by teaching 50% of a three-credit
graduate course.  The Graduate Studies Committee may approve other ways of
satisfying the requirement.  The student should document fulfillment of the
requirement by filing Form CS-11.

Each student is strongly urged, but not required, to spend at least one summer
in employment as a professional computer scientist.

The student should apply to the Graduate School for admission to candidacy
after passing the Doctoral Oral examination, completing all courses in the
approved Plan of Study, and receiving approval of the dissertation proposal
(GSH 21).  The student must apply by the deadline to the Graduate School for
award of the degree (GSH 22).

All the requirements for the Ph.D. must be completed within eight calendar
years from the date of the student's first registration in the Graduate School,
whether in Computer Science or in another graduate program.  If a student
completes a master's degree (in any program) at UNC-CH, the eight years are
counted instead from receipt of the master's degree.  As much as two years of
time spent in active military service, the Peace Corps, or VISTA will not be
counted against the time limit, provided that the Student Services Manager is
informed.  Also, a student may request a leave of absence for a definite,
stated time, not to exceed one year.  If the Department and Graduate School
approve, the duration of the leave is not counted against the time limit (GSH
9).

If degree requirements change during a student's stay in the Department, the
student has the option of continuing under the old rules or switching and
satisfying all the new rules.  In other words, the student can elect any point
in time during his or her stay in the Department and satisfy the rules in
effect at that point.

An exception to any rule may be requested for cause by petition.  Decisions
made by individual faculty members or by committees may be appealed to the
Department faculty as a whole.

SUMMARY AND REQUIRED FORMS
(obtainable from the Student Services Manager, 133 Sitterson)

By the end of  semester 1

Select an appropriate adviser.  Thereafter, change advisers as necessary

Register for Oral Qualifying examination (Form CS-10 )

By the end of semester 2

Pass the Ph.D. Qualifying examination

By the end of semester 5

Pass the Doctoral Written examination

Discuss research plan with at least three (potential) committee members; submit Form CS-12

By the end of semester 6

Name the remaining members of the doctoral committee (Graduate School form)
Submit Plan of Study (Form CS-6) approved by the committee

By the end of semester 7 

Submit a dissertation proposal to the committee; hold meeting for approval 
of proposal or
Request permission to take the second doctoral examination 
(Graduate School form)

Pass the Doctoral Oral examination

By the end of semester 8 
Submit dissertation proposal and pass the Doctoral Oral examination
Apply for Admission to Candidacy (Graduate School form) and submit degree 
card Q
you may need to submit another degree card at the beginning of your 
last semester

At any  time

Satisfy the program product requirement; submit Form CS-13

Satisfy the teaching requirement: submit Form CS-11

Submit course waiver forms (CS-2) as appropriate

Every six months after approval of the dissertation proposal

Meet with the committee to discuss dissertation progress (Form CS-7)

By the end of semester 9

When dissertation is in substantially finished form, announce 
dissertation defense, giving two weeks' notice

Pass Final Oral examination (Dissertation Defense)

Submit completed and signed dissertation to the Graduate School

Just before you leave . . .
Return office key(s) and building access card to receptionist




****FACULTY E-MAIL ADDRESSES****
Full-time faculty
James Anderson			anderson@cs.unc.edu
Gary Bishop			gb@cs.unc.edu
Frederick P. Brooks, Jr.	brooks@cs.unc.edu
Christina Burbeck		burbeck@cs.unc.edu
Peter Calingaert		pc@cs.unc.edu
Vernon L. Chi			chi@cs.unc.edu
James M. Coggins		coggins@cs.unc.edu
Prasun Dewan			dewan@cs.unc.edu
John G. Eyles			jge@cs.unc.edu
Henry Fuchs			fuchs@cs.unc.edu
John H. Halton			halton@cs.unc.edu
Kye S. Hedlund			hedlund@cs.unc.edu
Kevin Jeffay			jeffay@cs.unc.edu
Anselmo A. Lastra		lastra@cs.unc.edu
Gyula A. Mago			mago@cs.unc.edu
Dinesh Manocha			manocha@cs.unc.edu
Jonathan A. Marshall		marshall@cs.unc.edu
Ralph A. Mason			mason@cs.unc.edu
Steven E. Molnar		molnar@cs.unc.edu
Lars S. Nyland			nyland@cs.unc.edu
Stephen M. Pizer		smp@cs.unc.edu
David A. Plaisted		plaisted@cs.unc.edu
John Poulton			jp@cs.unc.edu
Jan F. Prins			prins@cs.unc.edu
Jannick P. Rolland		rolland@cs.unc.edu
Raj K. Singh			singh@cs.unc.edu
Dana Kay Smith			smithdk@cs.unc.edu
John B. Smith			jbs@cs.unc.edu
Donald F. Stanat		stanat@cs.unc.edu
David Stotts			stotts@cs.unc.edu
Jeannie M. Walsh		walsh@cs.unc.edu
Stephen F. Weiss		weiss@cs.unc.edu
Turner Whitted			jtw@cs.unc.edu
William V. Wright		wright@cs.unc.edu


Adjunct faculty
Hussein Abdel-Wahab		wahab@cs.unc.edu
David V. Beard			beard@cs.unc.edu
William E. Groves		bill_groves@unc.edu
Julian Rosenman			rosenman@cs.unc.edu
F. Donelson Smith		smithfd@cs.unc.edu




****FOR MORE INFORMATION****
Admissions and graduate studies
Phone:	(9l9) 962-1900
Internet mail:	admit@cs.unc.edu

Publications information
Internet mail:	pubs@cs.unc.edu

Technical reports information
Internet mail:	netlib@cs.unc.edu

General Department information
Phone:	(9l9) 962-1700
Internet mail:	geninfo@cs.unc.edu
FAX:	(919) 962-1799

Department of Computer Science
College of Arts and Sciences
The University of North Carolina
Campus Box 3175, Sitterson Hall
Chapel Hill, NC  27599-3175


