From dn@cs.brown.edu Wed Nov  9 13:53:21 1994
Status: RO
X-VM-v5-Data: ([nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil nil]
	["6287" "Wed" "9" "November" "1994" "13:53:00" "-0500" "\"Dawn T. Nicholaus\"" "dn@cs.brown.edu" nil "165" "Frequently Asked Questions on Graduate Admissions" "^From:" nil nil "11"])
Received: from cs.brown.edu (cs.brown.edu [128.148.128.2]) by cs.oberlin.edu (8.6.4/8.6.4) with ESMTP id NAA26624 for <jmankoff@cs.oberlin.edu>; Wed, 9 Nov 1994 13:53:20 -0500
Received: from daisy (daisy.cs.brown.edu [128.148.38.167]) by cs.brown.edu (8.6.8.1/Bullwinkle1.1) with ESMTP
	id NAA06117 for <jmankoff@cs.oberlin.edu>; Wed, 9 Nov 1994 13:53:01 -0500
Received: (dn@localhost) by daisy (8.6.8.1/BrownCS1.0) id NAA02227 for jmankoff@cs.oberlin.edu; Wed, 9 Nov 1994 13:53:00 -0500
Message-Id: <199411091853.NAA02227@daisy>
Content-Length: 6287
From: "Dawn T. Nicholaus" <dn@cs.brown.edu>
To: jmankoff
Subject: Frequently Asked Questions on Graduate Admissions
Date: Wed, 9 Nov 1994 13:53:00 -0500


Frequently Asked Questions on Graduate Admissions

Department of Computer Science --- Brown University


This document and related information on graduate programs in Computer
Science at Brown are available on the internet via mosaic at URL
http://www.cs.brown.edu/programs/, and via anonymous ftp from
ftp.cs.brown.edu:/pub/info/.



Q: What are the criteria for admission to graduate study in computer
science at Brown?


A: Academic performance, letters of recommendation and previous
research experience are crucial in our selection process.  We also
consider GRE scores, TOEFL scores (if relevant), motivation, work
experience, awards, honors, prizes, and other accomplishments.	In more
detail, we are looking for:

	Academic performance: The GPA is not the only criterion. Grades
	in computer science and related disciplines (e.g., math) count
	more than grades in other areas.  Also, we take into account
	the fact that at some very competitive schools it is very
	difficult to achieve a high GPA.

	Letters of recommendation: Letters must give a detailed,
	factual, and candid evaluation of the applicant's
	capabilities.  Rankings and comparisons with other students are
	very useful.  Ask your recommender to follow these guidelines.
	If your recommender is sending the letter directly, check to
	make sure the deadlines are met.

	Research experience: Research experience, although not
	required, can boost your chances of admission considerably.
	If you have worked on a research project, please tell us about
	it and ask at least one of your recommenders to comment on it.
	If your work is part of a joint project, the recommender should
	indicate your specific contribution to the project. Include
	abstracts or reprints of any papers you have published in
	journals or presented at conferences.

	GRE scores: These scores let us compare the basic skills of
	applicants from diverse backgrounds.  We are aware that: test
	performance can improve considerably with practice, some people
	do not perform well on tests, and the verbal GRE is harder for
	foreign applicants.

	TOEFL scores: Applicants whose native language is not English
	and who have not received a college degree from an institution
	in an English-speaking country must take the TOEFL exam.
	Additional evidence (e.g., certificate of completion of an
	English course) may also be submitted.

	Motivation: Please mention in your personal statement why you
	want to pursue graduate work in computer science and why you
	would like to do it at Brown.  Motivation is an important
	component of success in graduate school.

	Work experience: Please describe your work experience in the
	application and, if related to computer science, mention how
	you think it will help you in graduate school.

	Awards, honors, and prizes:  Unless they are well known (e.g.,
	NSF fellowship or graduation with honors), please give details
	about them (how many candidates?  how many awards? what were
	the selection criteria?).  This is especially important for
	foreign applicants.  If these awards are really important, we
	would expect your recommenders to mention them.



Q: Can I still apply if I cannot have all the material ready by the
   deadline?


A: There is no difficulty in being a few days late.  Incomplete
applications are also processed,  Note, however, that we make our
preliminary decisions for financial support by late January, and items
missing at that time will negatively affect your application.


Q: I cannot afford the application fee.  Can you waive it?


A: The Graduate School can waive this fee, but does so only rarely.  To
request a waiver, write the Graduate School (or send email to
michael_diffily@brown.edu) explaining your situation.  If your request
is denied, your application is kept on hold during the application
process and is reactivated if the application fee is paid.  In rare
cases our department takes the initiative to reactivate exceptional
applications without fee.  We regret that we cannot entertain requests
for such special consideration.



Q: What are my chances of being admitted?


A: We cannot estimate your likelihood of admission on the basis of your
letter or email message.  However, some statistics that may be helpful
are: last year 7 new students entered our Ph.D. program, selected from
a pool of 144 applicants, and 16 new students entered the Sc.M. program,
selected from a pool of 72 applicants.	To increase your chances of
admission, you can apply to both the Ph.D. and Sc.M. programs.



Q: Does a request for financial aid affect my chances of being admitted?


A: No. Admission and the awarding of financial aid are handled
independently.	All Ph.D. students are admitted with financial
support.  The department's policy is not to support Sc.M. students.



Q: I have requested an application packet; when will I receive it?


A: The packet is mailed (second class within the US, and air mail
outside the US) within 2-3 weeks from the date we receive your
request.  Requests are passed on to the Graduate School, which sends
the packets in batches.  Please contact the Graduate School (and not
the Computer Science Department) if you do not receive the packet
within 5 weeks from the date you requested it.



Q: Are photocopies or faxes of any of the application materials
acceptable?


A: Photocopies and faxes are acceptable only as placeholders in the
initial application; original documents are required to complete your
application.  Please send all documents to the Graduate School, not the
Computer Science Department.



Q: Can I contact the graduate school by phone or electronic mail?


A: The telephone number of the graduate school is (401) 863-2600; its
electronic mail address is grad_admissions@brown.edu.  Requests for
waivers and special consideration should be sent to Dean Michael
Diffily (email michael_diffily@brown.edu).  Of course regular mail also
works; the address is:	Graduate School, Box 1867, Brown University,
Providence, RI 02912, USA.



Q: Who decides whom to admit?


A: The Graduate School of Brown University is responsible for
admissions.  The Computer Science department evaluates the applications
and makes recommendations to the Graduate School. Usually, the Graduate
School follows our recommendations.




